.. _protocol_steps:


Step 1: handshake and Diffie-Hellman (DH) key exchange
******************************************************

The first message sent to another node is a *handshake message*. Its purpose is
to exchange public and session keys with another node. The handshake message is
composed of the node token and a self-signature using the private key of the
node token.

The node that receives the handshake message must verify the signature and
contents of the received node token before responding with a handshake
message of its own. Additionally, the receiving node calculates a shared secret
using its own private key and the public key of its new peer via Diffie-Hellman
key exchange.

When the initiating node receives a valid, authentic handshake response, it
derives matching session keys. Any follow-up messages must be encrypted and
have their integrity protected using session keys derived from the shared
secret, or else they will be discarded.

Each participant is now aware of the node token values of their peer. The
predefined fields are:

 * realm
 * subject
 * issuer
 * audience
 * uuid of the token
 * expiration and not_before timestamps
 * additional extensions containing physical node attributes:

   * hostname
   * port

.. NOTE:
   The token exchanged during the handshake is **not** encrypted and can be read
   by anyone observing the network. It must not contain passwords or other
   secret data.


Step 2: joining the network
***************************

The initiating node transmits a *join message* to its peer. The join message
contains the identity that uses the node. This identity may or may not be
identical to the node token. If they differ, then the identity must also
contain the fingerprint of the node token in an extension field. Later on, this
reference is used for routing purposes.

The receiving node can now authenticate and authorize the identity that is
requesting access to its network in the callbacks defined for this purpose. If
the identity cannot be authenticated, the handshake protocol sends a
*not-acknowledged message* back to the initiator, and the identity and node
data is marked as obsolete and deleted later, because sending the
not-acknowledged message still requires the established session key.

.. NOTE::
   If the identity is in a realm but cannot be authenticated at this time, the
   receiving node might forward the incoming token to the realm leader in order
   to defer authentication. Depending on the response of the realm leader, the
   receiving node might authorize the identity on its next attempt to join the
   network.

If the initiating node has been authenticated and authorized, it is added to
the routing table of the receiving node, and the join message is acknowledged
to the initiator. Additionally, existing peers of the network will receive an
*update message* which notifies them of the newly joined node.

After receiving the acknowledgment, the initiating node may begin to exchange
further messages with the nodes in the network.


Step 3: growing the peer-to-peer network
****************************************

Authenticated and authorized nodes exchange update and *piggy messages* in
order to exchange information about other peers known to them. After receiving
an update or piggy message, a node decides whether it would like to join the
new nodes, or whether it will merely forward the information.

The decision to join a new node is based on the distance between the node’s own
fingerprint and the fingerprint of the peer’s node token, as well as the soft
state of its routing table (i.e., occupancy and individual route health
inferred from latency).


Step 4: message exchange; communicating message availability and interest
*************************************************************************

Two nodes in the network that would like to exchange information about a given
*subject* get in touch as follows. Each node communicates their special
interest (sending or receiving) of a subject to the *subject coordinator*: the
node whose node token fingerprint is the closest to the subject hash at the
time. The subject coordinator then collects both requests, and passes on the
information to the peers involved. Filtering of tokens based on the *audience*
field will be applied here.

Message interest and availability are encoded as tokens that contain additional
information about the type of message exchange, the current threshold and some
other values as well, and are signed by their originating identity.

Each node can once more authenticate and authorize the identified peer by
verifying the exchanged token. Once the correct peer has been identified,
message exchange happens independently from the coordinator.
